
# DTrace Provider Reference

DTrace exposes different providers that publish probes that are grouped together for particular instrumentation or functionality.

-   **[CPC Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_cpc.md#)**
The CPU performance counter \(`cpc`\) provider makes available probes that are associated with CPU performance counter events.
-   **[DTrace Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_dtrace.md#)**  
The `dtrace` provider includes several probes that are specific to DTrace itself.
-   **[FBT Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_fbt.md#)**  
The `fbt` \(Function Boundary Tracing\) provider includes probes that are associated with the entry to and return from most functions in the Linux kernel. Therefore, there could be tens of thousands of `fbt` probes.
-   **[IO Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_io.md#)**
 The `io` provider makes available probes that relate to data input and output.
-   **[IP Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_ip.md#)**
The `ip` provider provides probes that can be used to study IP traffic.
-   **[Lockstat Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_lockstat.md#)**
The `lockstat` provider provides probes that can be used to study lock usage and contention.
-   **[Pid Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_pid.md#)**
The `pid` provider traces a user process, both function `entry` and `return`, and an arbitrary instruction.
-   **[Proc Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_proc.md#)**
The `proc` provider makes available the probes that pertain to the following activities: process creation and termination, LWP creation and termination, execution of new program images, and signal sending and handling.
-   **[Profile Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_profile.md#)**
The `profile` provider includes probes that are associated with an interrupt that fires at some regular, specified time interval.
-   **[Raw FBT Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_rawfbt.md#)**  
The `rawfbt` provider is a version of the `fbt` provider based on kprobes and allowing probing of synthetic function variants generated by the compiler.
-   **[Rawtp Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_rawtp.md#)**  
The `rawtp` provider gives DTrace users access to the raw tracepoints exposed by the kernel tracing system, including access to the untranslated arguments of the associated tracepoint events.
-   **[Sched Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_sched.md#)**
The `sched` provider makes available probes related to CPU scheduling.
-   **[SDT Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_sdt.md#)**  
 The Statically Defined Tracing \(SDT\) provider \(`sdt`\) creates probes at sites that a software programmer has formally designated. Thus, the SDT provider is chiefly of interest only to developers of new providers. Most users access SDT only indirectly by using other providers.
-   **[Syscall Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_syscall.md#)**  
The `syscall` provider makes available a probe at the entry to and return from every system call in the system.
-   **[TCP Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_tcp.md#)**  
The `tcp` provider makes available probe at different phases of TCP processing.
-   **[UDP Provider](../reference/dtrace_providers_udp.md#)**  
The `udp` provider makes available a probe at UDP send and receive operations in the system.
-   **[USDT Provider](../reference/dtrace-ref-StaticallyDefinedTracingofUserApplications.md#)**
Use the USDT provider, for user space statically defined tracing, to instrument user space code with probes that are meaningful for an application.

